
[[css|web|{cssdir}colors.css]]
[[css|web|{cssdir}fonts.css]]
[[css|web|{cssdir}main.css]]
[[css|web|{cssdir}npc.css]]
[[css|web|{cssdir}toc_index.css]]

[[namespace|haatz|./haatz.md]]

[[navbar|Investigation in Haatz|./index.md]]

# Overview

The party arrives in Haatz with only the knowledge that Exanell's totem is
somewhere in the city, and, while dormant, has not been taken over by a dark
force in the same way the other totems have. The other Sublimes believe
Exanell's totem is the Library of Xechen, but, as the library is destroyed and
the totem is definitely intact, it is most likely something else. Still, the
Library of Xechen is the first lead to help the party discover and restore the
totem.

The general course of their investigation should progress as follows:

1. Party pointed to the "Tower of Ux" (Library of Xechen) and Ux
2. Party consults with T'mqul Zicn, who reveals that Ux needs "his crown" to
fix his memories
3. Party asks around; House Steelgrad's records could hold more details
4. House Ixmuca purchased it from an antiquarian in the city
5. House Kisin received it from House Ixmuca as payment for healing / poison
6. [[l|haatz::Kiraza]] (of house Kahau) received it from Lord
[[l|haatz::Lemuhl]] in secret
7. House Kat has records of Lady Kirala's caravan to Ulitz, but the caravan was
robbed and the crown stolen
8. House Uaynih was responsible for tracking down the brigands; they are the
Summer Suns Gang, based in Haatz, but only the crown was stolen, and, there was
nothing to tie the leader ([[l|haatz::Ikilra]]) to the theft.
9. Party raids / interrogates the Summer Suns Gang and learns the theft was
comissioned by Lord Coztic Tlatoani

## [[a|Background]]

### [[a|The Totem of Exanell]]

The Library of Xechen is, in fact, the totem of Exanell. Before it could fall,
the previous librarian, Ezlavin, made it look like he had blown up the library
and destroyed it (see [[l|haatz::The Library of Xechen]]). In truth, the
explosion and the damage was an illusion.

Instead, Ezlavin sacrificed himself to create an insanely complex, persistent
disguise around the library to keep people from realizing it was not destroyed.
His assitant, Helnux, would be able to see through the disguise, and would see
to maintaining the enchantments around the library. However, to prevent the
mind reading of the Voidspawn from learning the truth of the library from
Helnux, Ezlavin and Helnux scrambled the assistant's mind, and left the key to
unscrambling it in a crown, kept secure in the library until such a time that
the totem could be safely restored. In the meantime, Helnux would essentially
be a madman, and, soon after the crown took away his mind, could only refer to
himself as Ux.

In response to the first totem awakening, and with the Sublimes counciling that
the totems were being restored, Exanell requested Helnux to restore his mind and
re-open the library so that she could once again reach out to her worshippers.
However, Helnux discovered the crown had been stolen: a feat which would have
only been possible by someone of extreme power to see through and break the
illusion.

### [[a|Helnux's Crown]]

The crown that took away Helnux's mind was a copper circlet with larimar gems in
the front. The crown removed important memories which made Helnux who he was.
Without those memories, his mind fractured and became a jumbled mess.

### [[a|The Tower of Ux]]

So much time has passed since the Library of Xechen has been the Library of
Xechen that the townsfolk don't even refer to it as that. Ux took residence in
the tower some time after the empire burned the tower down, and he's been in
there ever since.

The enchantments on the tower are designed to go unnoticed and get people to
pass by the tower without a second thought. The enchantments are level 9
arcane illusion magic effects. There are four layers of spells designed to
prevent people from realizing the tower is intact.

The widest-reaching effect prevents the tower from being noticed passively;
everyone may know it's there, but unless they're thinking about it, they pass
by without giving it another thought.

The second affect projects a sense of tenuousness and fragility to the tower.
The gently swaying, creaking, and rumbling from the illusion causes people
inside to feel like the whole tower is about to collapse and fall in on them.

The third, most complex effect projects the illusion that the tower is falling
apart, despite the fact that the tower is fully intact and standing. This
illusion distorts a person's spatial awareness, distorting distances and
changing how items interact to maintain the illusion. It adapts to fit the
expectations of the visitor.

Most interestingly, it can even inject itself into the mind of a visitor,
convincing them and those around them that an illusory item taken from the tower
(the illusion ensures nothing of true substance leaves the tower) is real. The
illusion does not maintain its presence for longer than an hour, though, but it
will try to find a convenient motivation for the taker to drop or lose track of
the item (such as appearing very gross / slimey).

The last layer is the protection of the library and its books. This layer is
composed of the wards passed down over the centuries. The only new addition is
a layer of spells to hide those effects.

## [[a|Introducing T'mqul Zicn|Introducing T'mqul]]

See the [[l|T'mqul Zicn|T'mqul]] section in the Haatz city notes for more
details on the wizard.

It is important to introduce T'mqul Zicn as early as possible upon arriving to
Haatz. Perhaps he is staying at the first inn they visit, or the first tavern
they seat at, and he approaches them as a fellow traveler. He is especially
eager to converse with any mages within the party, as he loves discussing the
arcane and debating topics. He has found intellectual discourse somewhat lacking
in Haatz, and is looking for stimulating conversation with remarkable
individuals. He will make himself known to the party.

At the earliest opportunity, he will discuss his field of research: using
enchantment magic for medicinal purposes: curing those afflicted by mental
illnesses by influencing the ethereophysical patterns within the mind. His
research is entirely theoretical at this point, and it would be extremely
unethical to test any of his reparative theories out on a living person, but he
is quite skilled at scrying the mind and diagnosing the nature of different
illnesses. This area of research will be extremely useful to the party.

If the party learns of Ux and his illness earlier than T'mqul's introduction,
the party can be pointed to T'mqul by consulting people. A helpful soul might
connect Ux to T'mqul by saying something like, "I heard that new wizard in town
is studying madness or some sort. Wonder if he's been involved with Ux."

# Starting the Investigation

The investigation into Exanell's totem can start pretty much anywhere in the
city. Most likely, it will start with the party either going to the [[l|Old
Lamb Inn|haatz::The Old Lamb Inn]] or to the Library of Xechen itself. The
initial stage of the investigation is concerned with locating Ux and getting
T'mqul to examine him, revealing the tampering with his mind and the need for
the crown.

Some leads to get the party moving are outlined in the following sections.
Please be sure to [[l|introduce T'mqul|Introducing T'mqul]] as early as
possible.

* The Tower of Ux
* 
